THE LETTER OF CYRIL TO JOHN OF ANTIOCH.

(Found in Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. IV., col. 343 and col. 164; and in Migne, Pat. Graece., Tom. LXXVII. 
[Cyrilli Opera, Tom. X.], col. 173. This is the letter which is often styled "the Ephesine Creed.")

Cyril to my lord, beloved brother, and fellow minister John, greeting in the Lord.

"Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad" for the middle wall of partition has been taken away, and grief 
has been silenced, and all kind of difference of opinion has been removed; Christ the Saviour of us all having awarded 
peace to his churches, through our being called to this by our most devout and beloved of God kings, who are the best 
imitators of the piety of their ancestors in keeping the right faith in their souls firm and immovable, for they 
chiefly give their mind to the affairs of the holy Churches, in order that they may have the noted glory forever and 
show forth their most renowned kingdom, to whom also Christ himself the Lord of powers distributes good things with 
plenteous hand and gives to prevail over their enemies and grants them victory. For he does not lie in saying: "As I 
live saith the Lord, them that honour me, I will honour." For when my lord, my most-beloved-of-God, fellow-minister 
and brother Paul, had arrived in Alexandria, we were filled with gladness, and most naturally at the coming of such a 
man as a mediator, who was ready to work beyond measure that he might overcome the envy of the devil and heal our 
divisions, and who by removing the offences scattered between us, would crown your Church and ours with harmony and
peace.

Of the reason of the disagreement it is superfluous to speak. I deem it more useful both to think and speak of things 
suitable to the time of peace. We were therefore delighted at meeting with that distinguished and most pious man, who 
expected perhaps to have no small struggle, persuading us that it is necessary to form a an alliance for the peace of 
the Church, and to drive away the laughter of the heterodox, and for this end to blunt the goads of the stubbornness 
of the devil. He found us ready for this, so as absolutely to need no labour to be bestowed upon us. For we remembered 
the Saviour's saying; "My peace I give unto you, my peace I leave with you." We have been taught also to say in 
prayers: "O Lord our God give us peace, for thou hast given us all things." So that if anyone should be in the 
participation of the peace furnished from God, he is not lacking in any good. That as a matter of fact, the 
disagreement of the Churches happened altogether unnecessarily and in-opportunely, we now have been fully satisfied 
by the document brought by my lord, the most pious bishop Paul, which contains an unimpeachable confession of faith,
and this he asserted to have been prepared, by your holiness and by the God-beloved Bishops there. The document is 
as follows, and is set down verbatim in this our epistle. Concerning the Virgin Mother of God, we thus think and 
speak; and of the man-net of the Incarnation of the Only Begotten Son of God, necessarily, not by way of addition
but for the sake of certainty, as we have received from the beginning from the divine Scriptures and from the 
tradition of the holy fathers, we will speak briefly, adding nothing whatever to the Faith set forth by the holy 
Fathers in Nice. For, as we said before, it suffices for all knowledge of piety and the refutation of all false
doctrine of heretics. But we speak, not presuming on the impossible; but with the confession of our own weakness, 
excluding those who wish us to cling to those things which transcend human consideration.

We confess, therefore, our Lord Jesus Christ, the Only Begotten Son of God, perfect God, and perfect Man of a 
reasonable soul and flesh consisting; begotten before the ages of the Father according to his Divinity, and in the 
last days, for us and for our salvation, of Mary the Virgin according to his humanity, of the same substance with his
Father according to his Divinity, and of the same substance with us according to his humanity; for there became a 
union of two natures. Wherefore we confess one Christ, one Son, one Lord. According to this understanding of this 
unmixed union, we confess the holy Virgin to be Mother of God; because God the Word was incarnate and became Man,
and from this conception he united the temple taken from her with himself.

For we know the theologians make some things of the Evangelical and Apostolic teaching about the Lord common as 
per-raining to the one person, and other flyings they divide as to the two natures, and attribute the worthy ones to 
God on account of the Divinity of Christ, and the lowly ones on account of his humanity [to his humanity].

These being your holy voices, and finding ourselves thinking the same with them ("One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism,") 
we glorified God the Saviour of all, congratulating one another that our churches and yours have the Faith which 
agrees with the God-inspired Scriptures and the traditions of our holy Fathers.

Since I learned that certain of those accustomed to find fault were humming around like vicious wasps, and vomiting 
out wretched words against me, as that I say the holy Body of Christ was brought from heaven, and not of the holy 
Virgin, I thought it necessary to say a few words concerning this to them:

O fools, and only knowing how to misrepresent, how have ye been led to such a judgment, how have ye fallen into so 
foolish a sickness? For it is necessary, it is undoubtedly necessary, to understand that almost all the opposition 
to us concerning the faith, arose from our affirming that the holy Virgin is Mother of God. But if from heaven and 
not from her the holy Body of the Saviour of all was born, how then is she understood to be Mother of God? What then
did she bring forth except it be true that she brought forth the Emmanuel according to the flesh? They are to be 
laughed at who babble such things about me. For the blessed prophet Isaiah does not lie in saying "Behold the Virgin
shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is God with us." Truly 
also the holy Gabriel said to the Blessed Virgin: "Fear not, Mary, for thou hast found favour with God. And, 
behold, thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and shall call his name Jesus. He shall save his 
people from their sins."

For when we say our Lord Jesus Christ descended from heaven, and from above, we do not so say this as if from above
and from heaven was his Holy Flesh taken, but rather by way of following the divine Paul, who distinctly declares: 
"the first man is of the earth, earthy; the Second Man is the Lord from heaven."

We remember too, the Saviour himself saying, "And no man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from 
heaven, even the Son of Man." Although he was born according to his flesh, as just said, of the holy Virgin, yet 
God the Word came down from above and from heaven. He "made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form 
of a servant," and was called the Son of Man, yet remaining what he was, that is to say God. For he is unchanging 
and unchangeable according to nature; considered already as one with his own Flesh, he is said to have come down 
from heaven.

He is also called the Man from heaven, being perfect in his Divinity and perfect in his Humanity, and considered 
as in one Person. For one is the Lord Jesus Christ, although the difference of his natures is not unknown, from 
which we say the ineffable union was made.

Will your holiness vouchsafe to silence those who say that a crasis, or mingling or mixture took place between the 
Word of God and flesh. For it is likely that certain also gossip about me as having thought or said such things.

But I am far from any such thought as that, and I also consider them wholly to rave who think a shadow of change 
could occur concerning the Nature of the Word of God. For he remains that which he always was, and has not been 
changed, nor can he ever be changed, nor is he capable of change. For we all confess in addition to this, that the
Word of God is impassible, even though when he dispenses most wisely this mystery, he appears to ascribe to 
himself the sufferings endured in his own flesh. To the same purpose the all-wise Peter also said when he wrote 
of Christ as having "suffered in the flesh," and not in the nature of his ineffable godhead. In order that he 
should be believed to be the Saviour of all, by an economic appropriation to himself, as just said, he assumed 
the sufferings of his own Flesh.

Like to this is the prophecy through the voice of the prophet, as from him, "I gave my back to the smiters, and my
cheeks to them that plucked off the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting." Let your holiness be 
convinced nor let anyone else be doubtful that we altogether follow the teachings of the holy fathers, especially
of our blessed and celebrated Father Athanasius, deprecating the least departure from it.

I might have added many quotations from them also establishing my words, but that it would have added to the length 
of my letter and it might become wearisome. And we will allow the defined Faith, the symbol of the Faith set forth 
by our holy Fathers who assembled some time ago at Nice, to be shaken by no one. Nor would we permit ourselves or 
others, to alter a single word of those set forth, or to add one syllable, remembering the saying: "Remove not the 
ancient landmark which thy fathers have set," for it was not they who spoke but the Spirit himself of God and the 
Father, who proceedeth also from him, and is not alien from the Son, according to his essence. And this the words 
of the holy initiators into mysteries confirm to us. For in the Acts of the Apostles it is written: "And after they 
were come to Mysia, they assayed to go into Bithynia; but the Spirit of Jesus suffered them not." And the divine 
Paul wrote: "So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God. But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, 
if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his."

When some of those who are accustomed to turn from the right, twist my speech to their views, I pray your holiness 
not to wonder; but be well assured that the followers of every heresy gather the occasions of their error from the 
God-inspired Scriptures, corrupting in their evil minds the things rightly said through the Holy Spirit, and 
drawing down upon their own heads the unquenchable flame.

Since we have leaned that certain, after having corrupted it, have set forth the orthodox epistle of our most 
distinguished Father Athanasius to the Blessed Epictetus, so as thereby to injure many; therefore it appeared 
to the brethren to be useful and necessary that we should send to your holiness a copy of it from some correct
ancient transcripts which exist among us. Farewell. 


THE DEFINITION OF FAITH OF THE COUNCIL OF CHALCEDON.

(Labbe and Cossart, Concilia, Tom. IV., col. 562.)

The holy, great, and ecumenical synod, assembled by the grace of God and the command of our most religious and 
Christian Emperors, Marcian and Valentinan, Augusti, at Chalcedon, the metropolis of the Bithynian Province, in the 
martyry of the holy and victorious martyr Euphemia, has decreed as follows:

Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, when strengthening the knowledge of the Faith in his disciples, to the end that 
no one might disagree with his neighbour concerning the doctrines of religion, and that the proclamation of the truth
might be set forth equally to all men, said, "My peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you." But, since the 
evil one does not desist from sowing tares among the seeds of godliness, but ever invents some new device against 
the truth; therefore the Lord, providing, as he ever does, for the human race, has raised up this pious, faithful, 
and zealous Sovereign, and has called together unto him from all parts the chief rulers of the priesthood; so that,
the grace of Christ our common Lord inspiring us, we may cast off every plague of falsehood from the sheep of 
Christ, and feed them with the tender leaves of truth. And this have we done with one unanimous consent, driving 
away erroneous doctrines and renewing the unerring faith of the Fathers, publishing to all men the Creed of the 
Three Hundred and Eighteen, and to their number adding, as their peers, the Fathers who have received the same 
summary of religion. Such are the One Hundred and Fifty holy Fathers who afterwards assembled in the great 
Constantinople and ratified the same faith. Moreover, observing the order and every form relating to the faith, 
which was observed by the holy synod formerly held in Ephesus, of which Celestine of Rome and Cyril of Alexandria, 
of holy memory, were the leaders, we do declare that the exposition of the right and blameless faith made by the 
Three Hundred and Eighteen holy and blessed Fathers, assembled at Nice in the reign of Constantine of pious memory, 
shall be pre-eminent: and that those things shall be of force also, which were decreed by the One Hundred and Fifty 
holy Fathers at Constantinople, for the uprooting of the heresies which had then sprung up, and for the confirmation 
of the same Catholic and Apostolic Faith of ours.

The Creed of the three hundred and eighteen Fathers at Nice.

We believe in one God, etc.

Item, the Creed of the one hundred and fifty holy Fathers who were assembled at Constantinople.

We believe in one God, etc.

This wise and salutary formula of divine grace sufficed for the perfect knowledge and confirmation of religion; for it 
teaches the perfect [doctrine] concerning Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and sets forth the Incarnation of the Lord to
them that faithfully receive it. But, forasmuch as persons undertaking to make void the preaching of the truth have 
through their individual heresies given rise to empty babblings; some of them daring to corrupt the mystery of the
Lord's incarnation for us and refusing [to use] the name Mother of God ( Qeotokos ) in reference to the Virgin, 
while others, bringing in a confusion and mixture, and idly conceiving that the nature of the flesh and of the
Godhead is all one, maintaining that the divine Nature of the Only Begotten is, by mixture, capable of suffering; 
therefore this present holy, great, and ecumenical synod, desiring to exclude every device against the Truth,
and teaching that which is unchanged from the beginning, has at the very outset decreed that the faith of the 
Three Hundred and Eighteen Fathers shall be preserved inviolate. And on account of them that contend against 
the Holy Ghost, it confirms the doctrine afterwards delivered concerning the substance of the Spirit by the One 
Hundred and Fifty holy Fathers who assembled in the imperial City; which doctrine they declared unto all men, 
not as though they were introducing anything that had been lacking in their predecessors, but in order to explain 
through written documents their faith concerning the Holy Ghost against those who were seeking to destroy his 
sovereignty. And, From this passage can easily be understood the very obscure passage in the letter of the 
Council to Leo, where it says that the definition was delivered by St. Euphemia as her own confession of faith. 
Vide note of the Ballerini on this epistle of Anatolius. 

Following the holy Fathers we teach with one voice that the Son [of God] and our Lord Jesus Christ is to be confessed
as one and the same [Person], that he is perfect in Godhead and perfect in manhood, very God and very man, of a 
reasonable soul and [human] body consisting, consubstantial with the Father as touching his Godhead, and 
consubstantial with us as touching his manhood; made in all things like unto us, sin only excepted; begotten 
of his Father before the worlds according to his Godhead; but in these last days for us men and for our 
salvation born [into the world] of the Virgin Mary, the Mother of God according to his manhood. This one and the 
same Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son [of God] must be confessed to be in two natures, (1) unconfusedly,
immutably, indivisibly, distinctly,  inseparably [united], and that without the distinction of natures being taken 
away by such union, but rather the peculiar property of each nature being preserved and being united in one Person 
and subsistence, not separated or divided into two persons, but one and the same Son and only-begotten, God the Word, 
our Lord Jesus Christ, as the Prophets of old time have spoken concerning him, and as the Lord Jesus Christ hath 
taught us, and as the Creed of the Fathers hath delivered to us.
                                    
These things, therefore, having been expressed by us with the greatest accuracy and attention, the holy Ecumenical 
Synod defines that no one shall be suffered to bring forward a different faith ( eteran pistin ), nor to write, nor
to put together, nor to excogitate, nor to teach it to others. But such as dare either to put together another 
faith, or to bring forward or to teach or to deliver a different Creed ( eteron sumbolon ) to as wish to be converted
to the knowledge of the truth, from the Gentiles, or Jews or any heresy whatever, if they be Bishops or clerics 
let them be deposed, the Bishops from the Episcopate, and the clerics from the clergy; but if they be monks or 
laics: let them be anathematized.

After the reading of the definition, all the most religious Bishops cried out: This is the faith of the fathers: let 
the metropolitans forthwith subscribe it: let them forthwith, in the presence of the judges, subscribe it: let that 
which has been well defined have no delay: this is the faith of the Apostles: by this we all stand: thus we all 
believe. 

CANON I.
WE have judged it fight that the canons of the Holy Fathers made in every synod even until now, should remain in force. 

CANON II.
IF any Bishop should ordain for money, and put to sale a grace which cannot be sold, and for money ordain a bishop, 
or chorepiscopus, or presbyters, or deacons, or any other of those who are counted among the clergy; or if through 
lust of gain he should nominate for money a steward, or advocate, or prosmonarius, or any one whatever who is on the 
roll of the Church, let him who is convicted of this forfeit his own rank; and let him who is ordained be nothing 
profited by the purchased ordination or promotion; but let him be removed from the dignity or charge he has obtained 
for money. And if any one should be found negotiating such shameful and unlawful transactions, let him also, if he is
a clergyman, be deposed from his rank, and if he is a layman or monk, let him be anathematized. 

CANON III.
IT has come to [the knowledge of] the holy Synod that certain of those who are enrolled among the clergy have, 
through lust of gain, become hirers of other men's possessions, and make contracts pertaining to secular affairs, 
lightly esteeming the service of God, and slip into the houses of secular persons, whose property they undertake 
through covetousness to manage. Wherefore the great and holy Synod decrees that henceforth no bishop, clergyman, 
nor monk shall hire possessions, or engage in business, or occupy himself in worldly engagements, unless he shall
be called by the law to the guardianship of minors, from which there is no escape; or unless the bishop of the city
shall commit to him the care of ecclesiastical business, or of unprovided orphans or widows and of persons who stand
especially in need of the Church's help, through the fear of God. And if any one shall hereafter transgress these
decrees, he shall be subjected to ecclesiastical penalties. 

CANON IV.
LET those who truly and sincerely lead the monastic life be counted worthy of becoming honour; but,
forasmuch as certain persons using the pretext of monasticism bring confusion both upon the churches and 
into political affairs by going about promiscuously in the cities, and at the same time seeking to establish
Monasteries for themselves; it is decreed that no one anywhere build or found a monastery or oratory contrary 
to the will of the bishop of the city; and that the monks in every city and district shall be subject to the 
bishop, and embrace a quiet course of life, and give themselves only to fasting and prayer, remaining permanently 
in the places in which they were set apart; and they shall meddle neither in ecclesiastical nor in secular affairs,
nor leave their own monasteries to take part in such; unless, indeed, they should at any time through urgent 
necessity be appointed thereto by the bishop of the city. And no slave shall be received into any monastery to 
become a monk against the will of his master. And if any one shall transgress this our judgment, we have decreed 
that he shall be excommunicated, that the name of God be not blasphemed. But the bishop of the city must make the
needful provision for the monasteries. 

CANON V.
CONCERNING bishops or clergymen who go about from city to city, it is decreed that the canons enacted by the Holy 
Fathers shall still retain their force. 

CANON VI.
NEITHER presbyter, deacon, nor any of the ecclesiastical order shall be ordained at large, nor unless the person 
ordained is particularly appointed to a church in a city or village, or to a martyry, or to a monastery. And if 
any have been ordained without a charge, the holy Synod decrees, to the reproach of the ordainer, that such an 
ordination shall be inoperative, and that such shall nowhere be suffered to officiate. 

CANON VII.
WE have decreed that those who have once been enrolled among the clergy, or have been made monks, shall accept 
neither a military charge nor any secular dignity; and if they shall presume to do so and not repent in such wise
as to turn again to that which they had first chosen for the love of God, they shall be anathematized. 

CANON VIII.
LET the clergy of the poor-houses, monasteries, and martyries remain under the authority of the bishops in every city 
according to the tradition of the holy Fathers; and let no one arrogantly cast off the rule of his own bishop; and if
any shall contravene this canon in any way whatever, and will not be subject to their own bishop, if they be clergy,
let them be subjected to canonical censure, and if they be monks or laymen, let them be excommunicated.

CANON IX.
IF any Clergyman have a matter against another clergyman, he shall not forsake his bishop and run to secular courts; 
but let him first lay open the matter before his own Bishop, or let the matter be submitted to any person whom each 
of the parties may, with the Bishop's consent, select. And if any one shall contravene these decrees, let him be
subjected to canonical penalties. And if a clergyman have a complaint against his own or any other bishop, let it 
be decided by the synod of the province. And if a bishop or clergyman should have a difference with the metropolitan
of the province, let him have recourse to the Exarch of the Diocese, or to the throne of the Imperial City of 
Constantinople, and there let it be tried. 

CANON X.
It shall not be lawful for a clergyman to be at the same time enrolled in the churches of two cities, that is, in the
church in which he was at first ordained, and in another to which, because it is greater, he has removed from lust 
of empty honour. And those who do so shall be returned to their own church in which they were originally ordained, 
and there only shall they minister. But if any one has heretofore been removed from one church to another, he shall 
not intermeddle with the affairs of his former church, nor with the martyries, almshouses, and hostels belonging to 
it. And if, after the decree of this great and ecumenical Synod, any shall dare to do any of these things now 
forbidden, the synod decrees that he shall be degraded from his rank. 

CANON XI.
WE have decreed that the poor and those needing assistance shall travel, after examination, with letters merely 
pacifical from the church, and not with letters commendatory, inasmuch as letters commendatory ought to be given only 
to persons who are open to suspicion.

CANON XII.
IT has come to our knowledge that certain persons, contrary to the laws of the Church, having had recourse to secular 
powers, have by means of imperial rescripts divided one Province into two, so that there are consequently two 
metropolitans in one province; therefore the holy Synod has decreed that for the future no such thing shall be 
attempted by a bishop, since he who shall undertake it shall be degraded from his rank. But the cities which have 
already been honoured by means of imperial letters with the name of metropolis, and the bishops in charge of them, 
shall take the bare title, all metropolitan rights being preserved to the true Metropolis. 

CANON XIII.
STRANGE and unknown clergymen without letters commendatory from their own Bishop, are absolutely prohibited from 
officiating in another city.

CANON XIV.
Since in certain provinces it is permitted to the readers and singers to marry, the holy Synod has decreed that it 
shall not be lawful for any of them to take a wife that is heterodox. But those who have already begotten children 
of such a marriage, if they have already had their children baptized among the heretics, must bring them into the 
communion of the Catholic Church; but if they have not had them baptized, they may not hereafter baptize them 
among heretics, nor give them in marriage to a heretic, or a Jew, or a heathen, unless the person marrying the 
orthodox child shall promise to come over to the orthodox faith. And if any one shah transgress this decree of 
the holy synod, let him be subjected to canonical censure.

CANON XV.
A WOMAN shall not receive the laying on of hands as a deaconess under forty years of age, and then only after 
searching examination. And if, after she has had hands laid on her and has continued for a time to minister, she 
shall despise the grace of God and give herself in marriage, she shall be anathematized and the man united to her.

CANON XVI.
It is not lawful for a virgin who has dedicated herself to the Lord God, nor for monks, to marry; and if they are
found to have done this, let them be excommunicated. But we decree that in every place the bishop shall have the 
power of indulgence towards them.

CANON XVII.
Outlying or rural parishes shall in every province remain subject to the bishops who now have jurisdiction over them,
particularly if the bishops have peaceably and continuously governed them for the space of thirty years. But if 
within thirty years there has been, or is, any dispute concerning them, it is lawful for those who hold themselves 
aggrieved to bring their cause before the synod of the province. And if any one be wronged by his metropolitan, 
let the matter be decided by the exarch of the diocese or by the throne of Constantinople, as aforesaid. And if 
any city has been, or shall hereafter be newly erected by imperial authority, let the order of the ecclesiastical 
parishes follow the political and municipal example.

CANON XVIII.
The crime of conspiracy or banding together is utterly prohibited even by the secular law, and much more ought it
to be forbidden in the Church of God. Therefore, if any, whether clergymen or monks, should be detected in 
conspiring or banding together, or hatching plots against their bishops or fellow-clergy, they shall by all means 
be deposed from their own rank.

CANON XIX.
WHEREAS it has come to our ears that in the provinces the Canonical Synods of Bishops are not held, and that on this 
account many ecclesiastical matters which need reformation are neglected; therefore, according to the canons of the 
holy Fathers, the holy Synod decrees that the bishops of every province shall twice in the year assemble together 
where the bishop of the Metropolis shall approve, and shall then settle whatever matters may have arisen. And 
bishops, who do not attend, but remain in their own cities, though they are in good health and free from any 
unavoidable and necessary business, shall receive a brotherly admonition.

CANON XX.
It shall not be lawful, as we have already decreed, for clergymen officiating in one church to be appointed to the 
church of another city, but they shall cleave to that in which they were first thought worthy to minister; those,
however, being excepted, who have been driven by necessity from their own country, and have therefore removed to 
another church. And if, after this decree, any bishop shall receive a clergyman belonging to another bishop, it 
is decreed that both the received and the receiver shall be excommunicated until such time as the clergyman who 
has removed shall have returned to his own church.

CANON XXI.
CLERGYMEN and laymen bringing charges against bishops or clergymen are not to be received loosely and without 
examination, as accusers, but their own character shall first be investigated.

CANON XXII.
IT is not lawful for clergymen, after the death of their bishop, to seize what belongs to him, as has been forbidden 
also by the ancient canons; and those who do so shall be in danger of degradation from their own rank.

CANON XXIII.
IT has come to the hearing of the holy Synod that certain clergymen and monks, having no authority from their own 
bishop, and sometimes, indeed, while under sentence of excommunication by him, betake themselves to the imperial 
Constantinople, and remain there for a long time, raising disturbances and troubling the ecclesiastical state, 
and turning men's houses upside down. Therefore the holy Synod has determined that such persons be first notified by 
the Advocate of the most holy Church of Constantinople to depart from the imperial city; and if they shall shamelessly
continue in the same practices, that they shall be expelled by the same Advocate even against their will, and 
return to their own places. 

CANON XXIV.
MONASTERIES, which have once been consecrated with the consent of the bishop, shall remain monasteries for ever, 
and the property belonging to them shall be preserved, and they shall never again become secular dwellings. And they 
who shall permit this to be done shall be liable to ecclesiastical penalties.

CANON XXV.
FORASMUCH as certain of the metropolitans, as we have heard, neglect the flocks committed to them, and delay the 
ordinations of bishops the holy Synod has decided that the ordinations of bishops shall take place within three 
months, unless an inevitable necessity should some time require the term of delay to be prolonged. And if he shall 
not do this, he shall be liable to ecclesiastical penalties, and the income of the widowed church shall be kept 
safe by the steward of the same Church.

CANON XXVI.
FORASMUCH as we have heard that in certain churches the bishops managed the church-business without stewards, it 
has seemed good that every church having a bishop shall have also a steward from among its own clergy, who shall 
manage the church business under the sanction of his own bishop; that so the administration of the church may not
be without a witness; and that thus the goods of the church may not be squandered, nor reproach be brought upon
the priesthood; and if he [i.e., the Bishop] will not do this, he shall be subjected to the divine canons.

CANON XXVII.
THE holy Synod has decreed that those who forcibly carry off women under pretence of marriage, and the alders or 
abettors of such ravishers, shall be degraded if clergymen, and if laymen be anathematized.

CANON XXVIII.
FOLLOWING in all things the decisions of the holy Fathers, and acknowledging the canon, which has been just read, of 
the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops beloved-of-God (who assembled in the imperial city of Constantinople, which is New 
Rome, in the time of the Emperor Theodosius of happy memory), we also do enact and decree the same things concerning 
the privileges of the most holy Church of Constantinople, which is New Rome. For the Fathers rightly granted 
privileges to the throne of old Rome, because it was the royal city. And the One Hundred and Fifty most religious 
Bishops, actuated by the same consideration, gave equal privileges ( isa presbeia ) to the most holy throne of New 
Rome, justly judging that the city which is honoured with the Sovereignty and the Senate, and enjoys equal privileges
with the old imperial Rome, should in ecclesiastical matters also be magnified as she is, and rank next after her; 
so that, in the Pontic, the Asian, and the Thracian dioceses, the metropolitans only and such bishops also of the
Dioceses aforesaid as are among the barbarians, should be ordained by the aforesaid most holy throne of the most 
holy Church of Constantinople; every metropolitan of the aforesaid dioceses, together with the bishops of his 
province, ordaining his own provincial bishops, as has been declared by the divine canons; but that, as has been 
above said, the metropolitans of the aforesaid Dioceses should be ordained by the archbishop of Constantinople, 
after the proper elections have been held according to custom and have been reported to him.

CANON XXIX.
It is sacrilege to degrade a bishop to the rank of a presbyter; but, if they are for just cause removed from 
episcopal functions, neither ought they to have the position of a Presbyter; and if they have been displaced without 
any charge, they shall be restored to their episcopal dignity.

And Anatolius, the most reverend Archbishop of Constantinople, said: If those who are alleged to have been removed 
from the episcopal dignity to the order of presbyter, have indeed been condemned for any sufficient causes, clearly
they are not worthy of the honour of a presbyter. But if they have been forced down into the lower rank without just 
cause, they are worthy, if they appear guiltless, to receive again both the dignity and priesthood of the Episcopate.

And all the most reverend Bishops cried out: The judgment of the Fathers is right. We all say the same. The Fathers
have righteously decided. Let the sentence of the Archbishops prevail.

And the most magnificent and glorious judges said: Let the pleasure of the Holy Synod be established for all time. 

CANON XXX.
SINCE the most religious bishops of Egypt have postponed for the present their subscription to the letter of the most 
holy Archbishop Leo, not because they oppose the Catholic Faith, but because they declare that it is the custom in the
Egyptian diocese to do no such tiring without the consent and order of their Archbishop, and ask to be excused until 
the ordination of the new bishop of the metropolis of Alexandria, it has seemed to us reasonable and kind that this 
concession should be made to them, they remaining in their official habit in the imperial city until the Archbishop 
of the Metropolis of Alexandria shall have been ordained.

And the most religious Bishop Paschasinus, representative of the Apostolic throne for Rome(1)], said: If your 
authority suggests and commands that any indulgence be shewn to them, let them give securities that they will not
depart from this city until the city of Alexandria receives a Bishop.

And the most magnificent and glorious judges, and the whole Senate, said: Let the sentence of the most holy 
Paschasinus be confirmed.

And therefore let them [.i.e., the most religious Bishops of the Egyptians] remain in their official habit, either 
giving securities, if they can, or being bound by the obligation of an oath. 