THE SECOND EPISTLE OF CYRIL TO NESTORIUS




THE 12 ANATHAMAS AGAINST NESTORIUS

1. If anyone will not confess that the Emmanuel is very God, and that therefore the Holy Virgin is the Mother of God, 
inasmuch as in the flesh she bore the Word of God made flesh, as it is written, "The Word was made flesh," let him be 
anathema. 

2. If anyone shall not confess that the Word of God the Father is united hypostatically to flesh, and that with that
flesh of his own, he is one only Christ both God and man at the same time: let him be anathema. 

3. If anyone shall after the hypostatic union divide the hypostases in the one Christ, joining them by that connexion 
alone, which happens according to worthiness, or even authority and power, and not rather by a coming together, which 
is made by natural union: let him be anathema. 

4. If anyone shall divide between two persons or subsistences those expressions which are contained in the Evangelical 
and Apostolical writings, or which have been said concerning Christ by the Saints, or by himself, and shall apply some 
to him as to a man separate from the Word of God, and shall apply others to the only Word of God the Father, on the 
ground that they are fit to be applied to God: let him be anathema. 

5. If anyone shall dare to say that the Christ is a God-bearing man and not rather that he is very God, as an only Son 
through nature, because "the Word was made flesh," and "hath a share in flesh and blood as we do:" let him be anathema.

6. If anyone shall dare say that the Word of God the Father is the God of Christ or the Lord of Christ, and shall not 
rather confess him as at the same time both God and Man, since according to the Scriptures, "The Word was made flesh," 
let him be anathema.
   
7. If anyone shah say that Jesus as man is only energized by the Word of God, and that the glory of the Only-begotten 
is attributed to him as something not properly his: let him be anathema. 

8. If anyone shall dare to say that the assumed man ought to be worshipped together with God the Word, and glorified 
together with him, and recognised together with him as God, and yet as two different things, the one with the other 
(for this "together with" is added by the Nestorians to convey this meaning); and shall not rather with one adoration 
worship the Emmanuel and pay to him one glorification, as it is written, "The Word was made flesh," let him be 
anathema. 

9. If any man shall say that the one Lord Jesus Christ was glorified by the Holy Ghost, so that he used through him a 
power not his own and from him received power against unclean spirits and power to work miracles before men and shall 
not rather confess that it was his own Spirit through which he worked these divine signs; let him be anathema. 

10. Whosoever shall say that it is not the divine Word himself, when he was made flesh and had become man as we are, 
but another than he, a man born of a woman, yet different from him, who is become our Great High 
Priest and Apostle; or if any man shall say that he offered himself in sacrifice for himself and not rather for us, 
whereas, being without sin, he had no need of offering or sacrifice: let him be anathema. 

11. Whosoever shall not confess that the flesh of the Lord gives life and that it pertains to the Word of God the 
Father as his very own, but shall pretend that it belongs to another person who is united to him only 
according to honour, and who has served as a dwelling for the divinity; and shall not rather confess, as we say, that 
that flesh gives life because it is that of the Word who gives life to all: let him be anathema.
    
12. Whosoever shall not recognize that the Word of God suffered in the flesh, that he was crucified in the flesh, and 
that likewise in that same flesh he tasted death and that he is become the first-begotten of the dead, for, as he is 
God, he is the life and it is he that gives life: let him be anathema. 


THE DECREE OF THE COUNCIL AGAINST NESTORIUS

As, in addition to other things, the impious Nestorius has not obeyed our citation, and did not receive the holy 
bishops who were sent by us to him, we were compelled to examine his ungodly doctrines. We discovered that he had held
and published impious doctrines in his letters and treatises, as well as in discourses which he delivered in this 
city, and which have been testified to. Compelled thereto by the canons and by the letter
of our most holy father and fellow-servant Coelestine, the 
Roman bishop, we have come, with many tears, to this sorrowful sentence against him, namely, that our Lord Jesus 
Christ, whom he has blasphemed, decrees by the holy Synod that Nestorius be excluded from the episcopal dignity, and 
from all priestly communion. 


THE LETTER OF POPE COELESTINE TO THE SYNOD OF EPHESUS. 

Coelestine the bishop to the holy Synod assembled at Ephesus, brethren beloved and most longed for, greeting in the 
Lord.

A Synod of priests gives witness to the presence of the Holy Spirit. For true is that which we read, since the Truth 
cannot lie, to wit, the promise of the Gospel; "Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the 
midst of them." And since tiffs is so, if the Holy Spirit is not absent from so small a number how much more may we 
believe he is present when so great a multitude of holy ones are assembled together! Every council is holy on account 
of a peculiar veneration which is its due; for in every such council the reverence which should be paid to that most 
famous council of the Apostles of which we read is to be had regard to. Never was the Master, whom they had received 
to preach, lacking to this, but ever was present as Lord and Master; and never were those who taught deserted by their
teacher. For he that had sent them was their teacher; he who had commanded what was to be taught, was their teacher; 
he who affirms that he himself is heard in his Apostles, was their teacher. This duty of preaching has been entrusted 
to all the Lord's priests in common, for by right of inheritance we are bound to undertake this solicitude, whoever of 
us preach the name of the Lord in divers lands in their stead for he said to them, "Go, teach all nations." You, dear 
brethren, should observe that we have received a general command: for he wills that all of us should perform that 
office, which he titus entrusted in common to all the Apostles. We must needs follow our predecessors. Let us all, 
then, undertake their labours, since we are the successors in their honour. And we shew forth our diligence in 
preaching the same doctrines that they taught, beside which, according to the admonition of the Apostle, we are 
forbidden to add aught. For the office of keeping what is committed to our trust is no less dignified than that of 
handing it down.

They sowed the seed of the faith. This shall be our care that the coming of our great father of the family, to whom 
alone assuredly this fulness of the Apostles is assigned, may find fruit uncorrupt and many fold. For the vase of 
election tells us that it is not sufficient to plant and to water unless God gives the increase. We must strive 
therefore in common to keep the faith which has come down to us to-day, through the Apostolic Succession. For we are
expected to walk according to the Apostle. For now not our appearance (species) but our faith is called in question. 
Spiritual weapons are those we must take, because the war is one of minds, and the weapons are words; so shall we be 
strong in the faith of our King. Now the Blessed Apostle Paul admonishes that all should remain in that place in which 
he bid Timothy remain. The same place therefore, the same cause, lays upon us the same duty. Let us now also do and 
study that which he then commanded him to do. And let no one think otherwise, and let no one pay heed to over strange 
fables, as he himself ordered. Let us be unanimous thinking the same thing, for this is expedient: let us do nothing 
out of contention, nothing out of vain glory: let us be in all things of one mind, of one heart, when the faith which 
is one, is attacked. Let the whole body grieve and mourn in common with us. He who is to judge the world is called into 
judgment; he who is to criticise all, is himself made the object of criticism, he who redeemed us is made to suffer 
calumny. Dear Brethren, gird ye with the armour of God. Ye know what helmet must protect our head, what breast-plate 
our breast. For this is not the first time the ecclesiastical camps have received you as their rulers. Let no one doubt 
that by the favour of the Lord who maketh twain to be one, there will be peace, and that arms will be laid aside since 
the very cause defends itself.

Let us look once again at these words of our Doctor, which he uses with express reference to bishops, saying, "Take 
heed to yourselves and to the whole flock, over which the Holy Ghost has placed you as bishop, that ye rule the church 
of God, which he hath purchased with his blood."

We read that they who heard this at Ephesus, the same place at which your holiness is come together, were called 
thence. To them therefore to whom this preaching of the faith was known, to them also let your defence of the same 
faith also be known. Let us shew them the constancy of our mind with that reverence which is due to matters of great 
importance; which things peace has guarded for a long time with pious understanding.

Let there be announced by you what things have been preserved intact from the Apostles; for the words of tyrannical 
opposition are never admitted against the King of Kings, nor can the business of truth be oppressed by falsehood.

I exhort you, most blessed brethren, that love alone be regarded in which we ought to remain, according to the voice 
of John the Apostle whose reliques we venerate in this city. Let common prayer be offered to the Lord. For we can form 
some idea of what will be the power of the divine presence at the united intercession of such a multitude of priests, 
by considering how the very place was moved where, as we read, the Twelve made together their supplication. And what 
was the purport of that prayer of the Apostles? It was that they might receive grace to speak the word of God with 
confidence, and to act through its power, both of which they received by the favour of Christ our God. And now what 
else is to be asked for by your holy council, except that ye may speak the Word of the Lord with confidence? What 
else than that he would give you grace to preserve that which he has given you to preach? that being filled with the 
Holy Ghost, as it is written, ye may set forth that one truth which the Spirit himself has taught you, although with 
divers voices.

Animated, in brief, by all these considerations (for, as the Apostle says: "I speak to them that know the law, and I 
speak wisdom among them that are perfect"), stand fast by the Catholic faith, and defend the peace of the Churches, 
for so it is said, both to those past, present, and future, asking and preserving "those things which belong to the 
peace of Jerusalem."

Out of our solicitude, we have sent our holy brethren and fellow priests, who are at one with us and are most approved 
men, Arcedius, and Projectus, the bishops, and our presbyter, Philip, that they may be present at what is done and may 
carry out what things have been already decreed be us.

To the performing of which we have no doubt that your holiness will assent when it is seen that what has been decreed
is for the security of the whole church. Given the viij of the Ides of May, in the consulate of Bassus and Antiochus. 


THE CANONS OF THE TWO HUNDRED HOLY AND BLESSED FATHERS WHO MET AT EPHESUS

1. Whereas it is needful that they who were detained from the holy Synod and remained in their own district or city, 
for any reason, ecclesiastical or personal, should not be ignorant of the matters which were thereby decreed; we, 
therefore, notify your holiness and charity that if any Metropolitan of a Province, forsaking the holy and Ecumenical 
Synod, has joined the assembly of the apostates, or shall join the same hereafter; or, if he has adopted, or shall 
hereafter adopt, the doctrines of Celestius, he has no power in any way to do anything in opposition to the bishops of 
the province, since he is already cast forth from all ecclesiastical communion and made incapable of exercising his 
ministry; but he shall himself be subject in all things to those very bishops of the province and to the neighbouring 
orthodox metropolitans, and shah be degraded from his episcopal rank.

2. If any provincial bishops were not present at the holy Synod and have joined or attempted to join the apostacy; or
if, after subscribing the deposition of Nestorius, they went back into the assembly of apostates; these men, according 
to the decree of the holy Synod, are to be deposed from the priesthood and degraded from their rank. 
 
3. If any of the city or country clergy have been inhibited by Nestorius or his followers from the exercise of the 
priesthood, on account of their orthodoxy, we have declared it just that these should be restored to their proper rank.
And in general we forbid all the clergy who adhere to the Orthodox and Ecumenical Synod in any way to submit to the 
bishops who have already apostatized or shall hereafter apostatize. 
 
4. If any of the clergy should fall away, and publicly or privately presume to maintain the doctrines of Nestorius or 
Celestius, it is declared just by the holy Synod that these also should be deposed. 

5. If any have been condemned for evil practices by the holy Synod, or by their own bishops; and if, with his usual 
lack of discrimination, Nestorius (or his followers) has attempted, or shall hereafter attempt, uncanonically to 
restore such persons to communion and to their former rank, we have declared that they shall not be profited thereby, 
but shall remain deposed nevertheless. 

6. Likewise, if any should in any way attempt to set aside the orders in each case made by the holy Synod at Ephesus, 
the holy Synod decrees that, if they be bishops or clergymen, they shall absolutely forfeit their office; and, if 
laymen, that they shall be excommunicated. 

7. WHEN these things had been read, the holy Synod decreed that it is unlawful for any man to bring forward, or to 
write, or to compose a different Faith as a rival to that established by the holy Fathers assembled with 
the Holy Ghost in Nicaea.
   
But those who shall dare to compose a different faith, or to introduce or offer it to persons desiring to turn to the 
acknowledgment of the truth, whether from Heathenism or from Judaism, or from any heresy whatsoever, shall be deposed, 
if they be bishops or clergymen; bishops from the episcopate and clergymen from the clergy; and if they be laymen, they 
shall be anathematized.
   
And in like manner, if any, whether bishops, clergymen, or laymen, should be discovered to hold or teach the doctrines
contained in the Exposition introduced by the Presbyter Charisius concerning the Incarnation of the Only-Begotten Son 
of God, or the abominable and profane doctrines of Nestorius, which are subjoined, they shall be subjected to the 
sentence of this holy and ecumenical Synod. So that, if it be a bishop, he shall be removed from his bishopric and 
degraded; if it be a clergyman, he shall likewise be stricken from the clergy; and if it be a layman, he shall be 
anathematized, as has been afore said. 

8. Our brother bishop Rheginus, the beloved of God, and his fellow beloved of God bishops, Zeno and Evagrius, of the 
Province of Cyprus, have reported to us an innovation which has been introduced contrary to the ecclessiastical 
constitutions and the Canons of the Holy Apostles, and which touches the liberties of all. Wherefore, since injuries 
affecting all require the more attention, as they cause the greater damage, and particularly when they are 
transgressions of an ancient custom; and since those excellent men, who have petitioned the Synod, have told us in 
writing and by word of mouth that the Bishop of Antioch has in this way held ordinations in Cyprus; therefore the 
Rulers of the holy churches in Cyprus shall enjoy, without dispute or injury, according to the Canons of the blessed 
Fathers and ancient custom, the right of performing for themselves the ordination of their excellent Bishops. The same 
rule shall be observed in the other dioceses and provinces everywhere, so that none of the God beloved Bishops shall 
assume control of any province which has not heretofore, from the very beginning, been under his own hand or that of 
his predecessors. But if any one has violently taken and subjected [a Province], he shall give it up; lest the Canons
of the Fathers be transgressed; or the vanities of worldly honour be brought in under pretext of sacred office; or we 
lose, without knowing it, little by little, the liberty which Our Lord Jesus Christ, the Deliverer of all men, hath 
given us by his own Blood.
   
Wherefore, this holy and ecumenical Synod has decreed that in every province the rights which heretofore, from the
beginning, have belonged to it, shall be preserved to it, according to the old prevailing custom, unchanged and 
uninjured: every Metropolitan having permission to take, for his own security, a copy of these acts. And if any one 
shall bring forward a rule contrary to what is hero determined, this holy and ecumenical Synod unanimously decrees 
that it shall be of no effect. 


THE LETTER OF THE HOLY SYNOD OF EPHESUS, TO THE SACRED SYNOD IN PAMPHYLIA CONCERNING EUSTATHIUS WHO HAD BEEN THEIR 
METROPOLITAN. 

Forasmuch as the divinely inspired Scripture says, "Do all things with vice," it is especially their duty who have had 
the priestly ministry allotted to them to examine with all diligence whatever matters are to be transacted. For to 
those who will so spend their lives, it comes to pass both that they are established in [the enjoyment of] an honest 
hope concerning what belongs to them, and that they are borne along, as by a favouring breeze, in things that they 
desire: so that, in truth, the saying [of the Scripture] has much reason [to commend it]. But there are times when 
bitter and intolerable grief swoops down upon the mind, and has the effect of cruelly beclouding it, so as to carry it
away from the pursuit of what is needful, and persuade it to consider that to be of service which is in its [very] 
nature mischievous. Something of this kind we have seen endured by that most excellent and most religious Bishop 
Eustathius. For it is in evidence that he has been ordained canonically; but having been much disturbed, as he 
declares, by certain parties, and having entered upon circumstances he had not foreseen, therefore, though fully able
to repel the slanders of his persecutors, he nevertheless, through an extraordinary inexperience of affairs, 
declined to battle with the difficulties which beset him, and in some way that we know not set forth an act of 
resignation. Yet it behooved him, when he had been once en-trusted with the priestly care, to cling to it with 
spiritual energy, and, as it were, to strip himself to strive against the troubles and gladly to endure the sweat
for which he had bargained. But inasmuch as he proved himself to be deficient in practical capacity, having met 
with this misfortune rather from inexperience than from cowardice and sloth, your holiness has of necessity 
ordained our most excellent and most religious brother and fellow-bishop, Theodore, as the overseer of the Church; 
for it was not reasonable that it should remain in widowhood, and that the Saviour's sheep should pass their time 
without a shepherd. But when he came to us weeping, not contending with the aforenamed most religious Bishop Theodore 
for his See or Church, but in the meantime seeking only for his rank and title as a bishop, we all suffered with the 
old man in his grief, and considering his weeping as our own, we hastened to discover whether the aforenamed 
[Eustathius] had been subjected to a legal deposition, or whether, forsooth, he had been convicted on any of the 
absurd charges alleged by certain parties who had poured forth idle gossip against his reputation. And indeed we 
learned that nothing of such a kind had taken place, but rather that his resignation had been counted against the 
said Eustathins instead of a [regular] indictment. Wherefore, we did by no means blame your holiness for being 
compelled to ordain into his place the aforenamed most excellent Bishop Theodore. But forasmuch as it was not seemly 
to contend much against the unpractical character of the man, while it was rather necessary to have pity on the eider
who, at so advanced an age, was now so far away from the city which had given him birth, and from the dwelling-places
of his fathers, we have judicially pronounced and decreed without any opposition, that he shall have both the name,
and the rank, and the communion of the episcopate. On this condition, however, only, that he shall not ordain, and
that he shall not take and minister to a Church of his own individual authority; but that [he shall do so only] if
taken as an assistant, or when appointed, if it should so chance, by a brother and fellow-bishop, in accordance 
with the ordinance and the love which is in Christ. If, however, ye shall determine anything more favourable towards 
him, either now or hereafter, this also will be pleasing to the Holy Synod. 


THE LETTER OF THE SYNOD TO POPE CELESTINE.

The Holy Synod which by the grace of God was assembled at Ephesus the Metropolis to the most holy and our 
fellow-minister Coelestine, health in the Lord.

The zeal of your holiness for piety, and your care for the right faith, so grateful and highly pleasing to God the 
Saviour of us all, are worthy of all admiration. For it is your custom in such great matters to make trial of all 
things, and the confirmation of the Churches you have made your own care. But since it is right that all things which
have taken place should be brought to the knowledge of your holiness, we are writing of necessity [to inform you] 
that, by the will of Christ the Saviour of us all, and in accordance with the orders of the most pious and 
Christ-loving Emperors, we assembled together in the Metropolis of the Ephesians from many and far scattered regions, 
being in all over two hundred bishops. Then, in accordance with the decrees of the Christ-loving Emperors by whom we 
were assembled, we fixed the date of the meeting of the holy Synod as the Feast of the Holy Pentecost, all agreeing 
thereto, especially as it was contained in the letters of the Emperors that if anyone did not arrive at the appointed 
time, he was absent with no good conscience, and was inexcusable both before God and man. The most reverend John
bishop of Antioch stopped behind; not in singleness of heart, nor because the length of the journey made the 
impediment, but hiding in his mind his plan and his thought (which was so displeasing to God,) [a plan and thought] 
which he made clear when not long afterwards he arrived at Ephesus.

Therefore we put off the assembling [of the council] after the appointed day of the Holy Pentecost for sixteen whole 
days; in the meanwhile many of the bishops and clerics were overtaken with illness, and much burdened by the expense, 
and some even died. A great injury was thus being done to the great Synod, as your holiness easily perceives. For he 
used perversely such long delay that many from much greater distances arrived before him.

Nevertheless after sixteen days had passed, certain of the bishops who were with him, to wit, two Metropolitans, the 
one Alexander of Apamea, and the other Alexander of Hierapolis, arrived before him. And when we complained of the tardy 
coming of the most reverend bishop John, not once, but often, we were told, "He gave us command to announce to your 
reverence, that if anything should happen to delay him, not to put off the Synod, but to do what was right." After 
having received this message,--and as it was manifest, as well from his delay as from the announcements just made to 
us, that he refused to attend the Council, whether out of friendship to Nestorius, or because he had been a cleric of 
a church under his sway, or out of regard to petitions made by some in his favour,--the Holy Council sat in the great
church of Ephesus, which bears the name of Mary.

But when all with zeal had come together, Nestorius alone was found missing from the council, thereupon the holy Synod
 sent him admonition in accordance with the canons by bishops, a first, second, and third time. But he surrounding his 
 house with soldiers, set himself up against the ecclesiastical laws, neither did he shew himself, nor give any 
 satisfaction for his iniquitous blasphemies.

After this the letters were read which were written to him by the most holy and most reverend bishop of the Church of 
Alexandria, Cyril, which the Holy Synod approved as being orthodox and without fault ( orqws kai alhptws ekein ), and 
in no point out of agreement either with the divinely inspired Scriptures, or with the faith banded down and set forth
in the great synod of holy Fathers, which assembled sometime ago at Nice in Bithynia, as your holiness also rightly 
having examined this has given witness.

On the other hand there was read the letter of Nestorius, which was written to the already mentioned most holy and 
reverend brother of ours and fellow-minister, Cyril, and the Holy Synod was of opinion that those things which were 
taught in it were wholly alien from the Apostolic and Evangelical faith, sick with many and strange blasphemies.

His most impious expositions were likewise read, and also the letter written to him by your holiness, in which he was
properly condemned as one who had written blasphemy and had inserted irreligious views ( fwnas ) in his private 
exegesis, and after this a just sentence of deposition was pronounced against him; especially is this sentence just, 
because he is so far removed from being penitent, or from a confession of the matters in which he blasphemed, while 
yet he had the Church of Constantinople, that even in the very metropolis of the Ephesians, he delivered a sermon to 
certain of the Metropolitical bishops, men who were not ignorant, but learned and God-fearing, in which he was bold
enough to say, "I do not confess a two or three months old God," and he said other things more outrageous than this.

Therefore as an impious and most pestilent heresy, which perverts our most pure religion ( qrhskeian ) and which
overthrows from the foundation the whole economy of the mystery [i.e. the Incarnation], we cast it down, as we have 
said above. But it was not possible, as it seemed, that those who had the sincere love of Christ, and were zealous in 
the Lord should not experience many trials. For we had hoped that the most reverend John, bishop of Antioch would have 
praised the sedulous care and piety of the Synod, and that perchance he would have blamed the slowness of Nestorius's 
deposition. But all things turned out contrary to our hope. For he was found to be an enemy, and a most warlike one, 
to the holy Synod, and even to the orthodox faith of the churches, as these things indicate.

For as soon as he was come to Ephesus, before he had even shaken off the dust of the journey, or changed his travelling 
dress, he assembled those who had sided with

Nestorius and who had uttered blasphemies against their head, and only not derided the glory of Christ, and gathering 
as a college to himself, I suppose, thirty men, having the name of bishops (some of whom were without sees, wandering 
about and having no dioceses, others others again had for many years been deposed for serious causes from their 
metropolises, and with these were Pelagians and the followers of Celestius, and some of those who were turned out of 
Thessaly), he had the presumption to commit a piece of iniquity no man had ever done before. For all by himself he drew 
up a paper which he called a deposition, and reviled and reproached the most holy and reverend Cyril, bishop of 
Alexandria, and the most reverend Memnon, bishop of Ephesus, our brother, and fellow-minister, none of us knowing 
anything about it, and not even those who were thus reviling knew what was being done, nor for what reason they had 
presumed to do this. But ignoring the anger of God for such behaviour, and unheeding the ecclesiastical canons, and 
forgetting that they were hastening to destruction by such a course of action, under the name of an excommunication,
they then reviled the whole Synod. And placing these acts of theirs on the public bulletin boards, they exposed them 
to be read by such as chose to do so, having posted them on the outside of the theatres, that they might make a 
spectacle of their impiety. But not even was this the limit of their audacity; but as if they had done something in 
accordance with the canons, they dared to bring what they had done to the ears of the most pious and Christ-loving 
Emperors. Things being in this condition, the most holy and reverend Cyril, bishop of Alexandria and the most
reverend Memnon bishop of the city of Ephesus, offered some books composed by themselves and accusing the most 
reverend Bishop John and those who with him had done this thing, and conjuring our holy Synod that John and those 
with him should be summoned according to the canons, so that they might apologize for their dating acts, and if they 
had any complaints to make they might speak and prove them, for in their written deposition, or rather sheet of abuse,
they made this statement as a pretext, "They are Apollinarians, and Arians, and Eunomians, and therefore they have 
been deposed by us."

When, therefore, those who had endured their reviling were present, we again necessarily assembled in the great church, 
being more than two hundred bishops, and by a first, second, and third call on two days, we summoned John and his 
companions to the Synod, in order that they might examine those who had been reviled, and might make explanations, and 
tell the causes which led them to draw up the sentence of deposition; but he (1) did not dare to come.

But it was right that he, if he could truly prove the before-mentioned holy men to be heretics, both should come and 
prove the truth of that which, accepted as a true and indubitable crime, induced the temerarious sentence against them. 
But being condemned by his own conscience he did not come. Now what he had planned was this. For he thought that when 
that foundation-less and most unjust reviling was done away, the just vote of the Synod which it cast against the 
heretic Nestorius would likewise be dissolved. Being justly vexed, therefore, we determined to inflict according to 
law the same penalty upon him and those who were with him, which he contrary to law had pronounced against those who 
had been convicted of no fault. But although most justly and in accordance with law he would have suffered this 
punishment yet in the hope that by our patience his temerity might be conquered, we have reserved this to the decision 
of your holiness. In the meanwhile, we have deprived them of communion and have taken from them all priestly power, so 
that they may not be able to do any harm by their opinions. For those who thus ferociously, and cruelly, and 
uncanonically are wont to rush to such frightful and most wicked things, how was it not necessary that they should be 
stripped of the powers which [as a matter of fact] they did not possess, (2) of being able to do harm.

With our brethren and fellow-ministers, both Cyril the bishop and Memnon, who had endured reproval at their hands, we 
are all in communion, and after the rashness [of their accusers] we both have and do perform the liturgy in common, all
together celebrating the Synaxis, having made of none effect their play in writing, and having thus shewn that it
lacked all validity and effect. For it was mere reviling and nothing else. For what kind of a synod could thirty men
hold, some of whom were marked with the stamp of heresy, and some without sees and ejected [from their dioceses]? Or
what strength could it have in opposition to a synod gathered from all the whole world? For there were sitting 
with us the most reverend bishops Arcadius and Projectus, and with them the most holy presbyter Philip, all of
whom were sent by your holiness, who gave to us your presence and filled the place of the Apostolic See ( ths
apostolikhs kaqedras ). Let then your holiness be angered at what took place. But if license were granted to 
such as wished to pour reproval upon the greater sees, and thus unlawfully and uncanonically to give sentence or 
rather to utter revilings against those over whom they have no power, against those who for religion have endured such 
great conflicts, by reason of which now also piety shines forth through the prayers of your holiness [if, I say, all 
this should be tolerated], the affairs of the Church would fall into the greatest confusion. But when those who dare to 
do such things shall have been chastised aright, all disturbance will cease, and the reverence due to the canons will
be observed by all.

When there had been read in the holy Synod what had been done touching the deposition of the most irreligious 
Pelagians and Coelestines, of Coelestius, and Pelagius, and Julian, and Praesidius, and Florus, and Marcellian, and
Orontius, and those inclined to like errors, we also deemed it right ( edikaiwsamen ) that the determinations of your 
holiness concerning them should stand strong and firm. And we all were of the same mind, holding them deposed. And 
that you may know in full all things that have been done, we have sent you a copy of the Acts, and of the subscriptions 
of the Synod. We pray that you, dearly beloved t and most longed for, may be strong and mindful of us in the Lord. 


DECREE OF THE SYNOD IN THE MATTER OF EUPREPIUS AND CYRIL. 

The petition of the most pious bishops Euprepius and Cyril, which is set forth in the papers they offered, is honest. 
Therefore from the holy canons and the external laws, which have from ancient custom the force of law,(1) let no
innovation be made in the cities of Europa, but according to the ancient custom they shall be governed by the bishops 
by whom they have been formerly governed. For since there never was a metropolitan who had power otherwise, so neither 
hereafter shall there be any departure from the ancient custom. 